Welcome to Berea Temple, International Church's podcast.
I am your host, Timothy, and we're here together on this beautiful day to hear from God.
Today, we're fortunate to have our beloved pastor, Mike Gonzalez, with us, who will be sharing God's Word.
So let's all prepare ourselves to receive what God has in store for us today.
Let's begin.
All right, well, we are gonna continue on.
We're coming into the close of our series.
We have just a very few, a couple of topics left to cover in our series.
And as we have worked through the we are, that we are, AG, church members,
who bring hope and healing to our community.
And we do that by being good neighbors.
And we've talked a lot here recently about looking out your window and seeing your neighbor working in their yard or coming home from work and thinking, I should introduce myself.
I should make an effort.
Now, I don't want you to raise your hands, but how many have done that in the last couple of weeks?
How many have stepped out, taken the challenge seriously and stepped out and met a neighbor or met somebody new at work or met the lady or the guy who checks out your groceries at the register?
There was a day that you would check out.
Matter of fact, there's still a day where Letitia and I, grocery shop, we typically go to the same lady week after week.
that checks out our groceries and we're beginning to build a relationship with her.
We're beginning to find out things about her family and it's just simply a way to be a neighbor.
Now, this lady does not live anywhere near us.
We shop down in South County for some of the stuff that we grocery shop for.
But we've talked a lot about making this step.
And for a lot of us, it comes down to I just don't know where to start.
Most of us have had that kind of moment, where we realize that even though we live close enough to people, we know very little about them.
And frankly, again, as we've spoken about, the thought of striking up just a conversation with somebody that we don't know can feel intimidating or even a little bit awkward.
And so what do we do?
We zip our lip.
We don't talk to them.
We continue to live out our daily lives as strangers.
And even though we've lived across the street from them for days, weeks, months, years, we don't really know them all that well.
And we've looked at Scripture and we've seen that God calls us to something more than just proximity.
We're not just supposed to live near people.
We're called to
What's the big L word?
Love them.
Jesus again commands us.
It's part of the great commandment is to love our neighbor as ourself.
Again, not just a metaphor.
It is a real practical call to action.
And so how do we get there?
How do we move from being strangers
to building real meaningful relationships with the people God has placed in our path.
There's a story I want to share from the book that we're kind of loosely basing this around called The Art of Neighboring.
The author describes seeing a neighbor
his neighbor Eric working on a car one day.
Now the author admits that he doesn't know much about cars, but he saw an opportunity to connect.
So he walked outside and he asked Eric what he was working on.
A simple question led to a conversation, heaven forbid.
One that started with cars, but soon moved on to deeper topics.
And by the end of the day, the two neighbors knew more about each other than just their names or just, hey, how are you?
And it all started with a simple step, going outside and saying hello.
Now, I don't know how many of you have done this, but it's really easy to go and lean over the engine of a car if you're, you know, typically for guys.
You just kind of lean on there and you go, hmm.
Yeah.
So what's going on?
Like you know anything about cars.
They could tell you that they're whatever and you just go, oh yeah.
But it gives an opportunity for a conversation.
We've all had conversations with people that we didn't have a clue what they were talking about.
They were talking about, anybody who talks to Brother Prince, we don't have a clue what he's talking about.
His IT is, no, I'm kidding.
But we've all been there and we've all had those kinds of conversations.
When we talk about taking a first step, it's simply saying hello.
What happens after that, God takes over.
He has the opportunity for us to be able to move in.
And so I want you, if you have your Bibles, turn to Philippians chapter two and verse four.
See, building relationships with our neighbors doesn't require grand gestures or big dramatic efforts.
It starts with small steps, learning names, asking questions, and frankly showing up, just being there.
It's these small steps that when they're taken with intention can lead to meaningful relationships that will reflect God's love.
So here's what I want us to do.
Today our topic is simply this, from stranger to neighbor, building relationships one step at a time.
Today we're going to talk about becoming, moving from stranger to neighbor, becoming a neighbor.
rather than just somebody who lives next door to somebody else.
Philippians chapter two and verse four, it says, don't look only for your own, out only for your own interests, but take an interest in others too.
We've read this in the past, but again, this is a foundational place for us to jump off at.
Because this is, again, as we started back at the beginning of this subseries, this is the foundation of neighboring.
Don't look out only for your own interests.
When the city gains, we gain.
When the city prospers, we prosper.
We are a community.
We've got to look beyond our own lives, beyond our own comfort zones and make an effort to know and care for the people around us.
This is a place for us to understand even within the church, being able to create a space
where everybody can come and worship, where everybody feels welcome, everybody that walks in those doors at the back of the building, or back here at the parking lot.
When they walk in, they feel that they're part of the family of God, that it is not just one way or the other way, it's not just my interests, but it's our interests.
So today, we're gonna look at how to move from being a stranger to neighbor, and how small little steps can turn
distant interactions into deeper, meaningful relationships.
Then of course, we'll look at how God's word calls us to love our neighbors in very practical ways.
Because I want us ultimately to be able to do this.
I want us to be able to break through the barriers that keep us from building genuine connections.
Because again, the greatest way to build Berea Temple
is to be a good neighbor, to know the people that God has put in your sphere of influence.
It's not a mistake, it's not a coincidence that you live where you live.
If we are who we say we are, and we are children of God, we are on loan to this planet, if you will, go with me a little bit.
If we are ambassadors for the Almighty,
He has sent us to the embassy of our home to act on his behalf in the vicinity of the house that he has placed us in.
Because he has been gracious to give us that home, whether we rent it, whether we own it, it doesn't matter.
He has been gracious to put a roof over our head.
And that is our embassy that we have been assigned to
to the people that live around us.
We come back here to get the next step, the next set of orders, the next set of encouragement, the next set of uplifting, the next set of whatever is necessary so that we go back to our embassy and we can take the gospel into the place that God has for us.
Now that we understand that it is part of who we are and what we are, let's do this.
Let's go into our first point.
How do we move from stranger to acquaintance?
Look at again, Philippians chapter two, four.
That's going to be our passage for here.
You can hold it there.
The first step in becoming a good neighbor is moving from stranger to acquaintance.
It might sound simple,
But in today's world of instant on technology, isolation, I can grab my phone and I can put it in front of me and never do you ever able to even touch me.
But we can have relationships and I don't know about you young people.
I can't even fathom this, but I know you all do it.
Dating online.
Never even met the person.
You've never seen them.
Yet you're in a relationship with them.
I don't know how that works.
But moving from stranger to acquaintance, somebody that you actually know, because of the wonderful opportunities that technology has given us, it has changed things.
We have busier schedules.
We have personal distractions.
And frankly, often a little hesitation.
and it's easy to stay in our own little bubble.
It's easy to stay behind the glass and the camera of our phone.
It's easy to stay inside the safe, secure pocket of our own home.
We write it off as we don't have time or I'll introduce myself later.
But again, when we go back to our passage about not looking out only for our own interests, but to take an interest in others, it means that God is calling us to take the initiative.
to go beyond ourselves and to connect with the people again that he has placed around us.
I hope this is connecting with you a little bit.
I hope it's giving you another way of looking.
You're not just in a house.
Well, it's the only one I could afford at the time.
Well, there's a reason it's the only one you could afford at the time.
God has placed you strategically in that place.
And he's wanting you to step out and it's that first step that's always the hardest, but it's essential to building any kind of relationship that he's called us to.
Listen, can I tell you how important it is just to learn names?
Just to learn somebody's name, to learn their face.
I'm gonna tell you a story and it's gonna make me look not so great, but I hope that you'll find humor in it.
When I first got here,
I had to learn everybody's names and everybody's faces.
Ladies, you didn't do me any favors.
So not only did we have the masks, right?
I would try to get used to recognizing your face from your eyes and, oh, okay, well that's sister so-and-so and that's sister so-and-so.
But then next Sunday, you would come with, with what?
completely different hair than you had the last Sunday.
Last Sunday you had very nice, tight, beautiful hair.
Every Sunday your hair is all beautiful.
I'm not just trying to be silly.
You take great care and it's very obvious.
But the following Sunday you would have a nice big beautiful head of hair.
And there's no way somebody grew from this to this in a week.
But trying to learn your names was important to me.
So then I had to start making notes.
And one of the sisters told me, oh well that's, she changes her hair.
Great, thanks.
And I started making notes because I felt it was important to know your name, that it was important to know your face.
If in case I saw you out and about, I would know who you were.
It is one of the simplest but most effective ways is moving from stranger to acquaintance is learning your neighbor's name.
Hi, John.
Hi, Bill.
Hi, Ted.
Hi, whomever.
It says that you're invested in them.
It shows that you value them as an individual, not just as somebody who gets passed by.
And it's these little steps that give you an open door into speaking into their lives.
Our passage talks about looking beyond our own individual world and engaging with other people, being intentional about the way that we handle
our relationships.
Jesus modeled this in ministry.
He didn't just pass by people, he engaged with them personally, learning about their lives and addressing their needs.
In the same way, when we make an effort to know our neighbor's names, we're laying the foundation for deeper, more intimate personal connections.
Think about when somebody remembers your name.
How's it feel when a colleague or that grocery store clerk comes?
Hi, Mike, how are you?
It's great to see you.
How many people do you see in a day?
And I'm only here once a week and you remember my name?
Shows that they care.
I had a pastor early on that I served with.
He had one of the hospitality team members.
When a new visitor would come, they would try to catch them and take a picture of the new people.
Anybody remember Polaroids?
You'd just take the picture and you'd pop out into the camera.
Well, the hospitality member would take the picture and they'd write the name of the person on it.
And he would set that in his Bible every week.
And every week, as he was in his scriptures preparing for the following week, he would have their face
and their name.
So if they came back the following Sunday, he would greet them by name.
And I thought that was one of the greatest things.
Now I don't take your picture because most people don't like that anymore with all the privacy stuff and everything, but I make an effort to try desperately.
I don't always succeed, but if you tell me your name last week, I make a strong effort to know your name this week.
And this is the same thing that we can do with our neighbors.
It's all about the small interactions.
It's all about the small steps, the how's your day going, moving beyond just hello.
What does Proverbs 2717 say?
This is every guy's passage.
It says this iron sharpens iron.
So one friend sharpens another.
I got mine.
There we go.
And as these little interactions accumulate over time, every time you say hello, every time you ask how they're doing, every time you express any kind of interest in their lives, do you know what you're actually doing?
Some plant, some water, God gives the increase.
That's why I've mentioned before, I'm a
big proponent of lifestyle evangelism.
It's what I call it.
I don't know what it's actually called.
I want you to see Jesus in me.
I don't want to do from the late 70s, early 80s, this thing called the evangelism explosion.
You walk up to somebody out of the blue and you, if you were to die today, where would you go?
Would you go to heaven or would you go to hell?
And that worked for a season, but I think that that type of evangelism
has done more damage over the last 30 years than simply me saying, yeah, I'm a Christian and people go, yeah, I know.
I can see it in you.
You're one of those.
I don't mind being called one of those because it's an opportunity to show who I am and to let my life sharpen another's.
It's about planting those seeds along the way.
the way that we handle ourselves, the way that we respond to things, the way that we manage what we do in a day to day.
One of the biggest lies that the enemy tries to tell people is God doesn't care about the day to day in your life, baloney.
If you didn't care about the day-to-day of your life, why would he stop and heal the lame man?
Why would he spit and do the mud on the blind guy's eye?
Why would he allow his power to go out to the woman with the issue of blood?
He cares about the day-to-day, the moment-by-moments of our lives.
And as we plant seeds in those moments, he's going, all I need you to do, I just need you to open the door.
I need you just to make the first step.
I'll open the rest of it.
I'll take the rest of the way.
I just need you to step out.
I need you to be the ambassador.
Think about the story earlier that we talked about with the author.
A simple question asking what the neighbor was working on opened the door to deeper conversation.
What started as
with a car soon turn into meaningful conversation about his neighbor's concern in their conversation.
It talks about a concern for his son, but it didn't happen because of a grand gesture, but because the author was willing to engage in a small everyday interaction.
I know that some of this may seem mundane.
Some of this sounds repetitive.
But the reality is, is that God has called us to relationship.
And if I'm being truly honest, even with myself, we don't, as Christians, we don't do a real good job of mixing outside of our little Jesus bubble.
The people that we surround ourselves with generally are other believers.
Guess what?
They already know Jesus.
There are people who are, even if they're not necessarily Christian, they're kind of already like us.
And we don't move beyond the little bubble, the little safe space that we create for ourselves.
But we have to move from stranger to acquaintance, because when we do that, then we can move from acquaintance to relationship.
So if you're a note taker, this is number two.
Once you move from being strangers to acquaintances, then we move into meaningful relationships.
So how do we move or how do we create opportunities for connection?
Well, there has to be intentional engagement.
We have to be intentional about what we're doing.
We have to do it on purpose.
Building a relationship with our neighbors requires intentionality.
We need to create opportunities to move beyond just small talk and into conversations that matter.
Luke chapter five versus 27 through 32.
Luke chapter five versus 27 to 32, if you're gonna look it up, if not, of course it'll be on our screen.
It says later, Jesus left town.
He saw a tax collector named Levi sitting at his tax collector's booth.
Follow me and be my disciple, Jesus said to him.
So Levi got up, left everything and followed him.
Later, Levi held a banquet in his home with Jesus as the guest of honor.
Many of Levi's fellow tax collectors and other guests also ate with him.
But the Pharisees and their teachers of religious law complained bitterly to Jesus' disciples.
Why do you eat and drink with such scum?
Jesus answered them, healthy people do not need a doctor.
Sick people do.
I have come to call not those who think they are righteous, but those who know they are sinners and need to repent.
See, Jesus didn't just stop at a brief interaction.
He didn't just say, hey, Levi, come follow me, let's go.
And leave it at that.
He intentionally engaged with him, going to his house, sharing a meal, but not just sharing a meal.
See, here's where Jesus gives us a model for what we're talking about, unless you think I'm just kind of jumping on a hobby horse.
Jesus gives us a model.
He goes, he steps out.
Who stepped out first?
Jesus did.
What am I asking you to do according to Scripture?
Step out.
He made the initial connection.
And then once he had the open door, then he had a relationship where Levi says, hey, I want you to come.
I want to give a dinner in your honor.
And I want to bring my people.
He didn't know he wasn't supposed to bring those people or he didn't care one of the two at that point.
But he brings Jesus and he brings all these other people.
Guess what he just did?
Evangelism.
He said, I got to know this guy.
He's not such a bad dude.
I want you guys to come and meet him.
This is how we grow a church.
This is how we, it is evangelism that is exponential.
If I have a relationship with one of you, so let me take the lead guys that I was telling you about earlier.
If I teach them how to do evangelism, there's four of them right now.
And I say, now listen guys, part of leadership is being able to step out on your own.
And they go and they step out and they start talking to four people.
How many people now do I have?
Where's my math people?
There's four of them and all four of them talk to four people.
So we have four times four.
So I started with four, but now how many do I have?
I have 16.
There's an average of 60-ish, five-ish people every Sunday at Berea Temple.
How about if each one of you reached two?
How full would the church be in a matter of a couple of weeks?
Two is all I'm asking.
If we can get past this idea of not wanting to move beyond our own little circle,
If we can get in our head, if we can get through from being a stranger to an acquaintance so that we can go from an acquaintance to what?
Right.
Then we have an opportunity to have relationship that then opens the door where they say, hey, I want you to get to know this person that I've met.
We have that intentional engagement.
Think of it this way.
Think about a time when you went over to somebody's house and you spent some quality time with them.
It's in these kinds of moments.
Somebody invites you over for Christmas or Thanksgiving or just for dinner or a barbecue in the summer.
We begin to build relationship.
And the same thing is true of our neighbors.
We invite them into our lives even in small ways.
We open the door for trust and for friendship to begin to grow because we have an opportunity to overcome the awkwardness.
It's going to feel weird at first.
but we have the opportunity to move beyond it.
It'll be uncomfortable to ask a neighbor to spend time.
And frankly, sometimes they're gonna misunderstand your intentions.
I've had this happen recently.
I asked somebody, I was like, hey, I'd like to take you out for a soda.
They said, well, no, okay.
Nothing more than just pastor wanting to get to know the person a little bit better and have an opportunity to visit.
Okay, that's fine.
I mean, it's not a big deal.
But it's gonna be awkward a little bit and it's okay.
Jesus shows us that the relationships are worth the discomfort.
Again, back at our Luke chapter five passage, when Jesus had dinner with Levi and his friends, again, it was probably not an uncomfortable situation.
Or I'm sorry, it probably wasn't a comfortable situation for everybody there.
Here the tax collectors are looking at this guy.
The disciples know it.
Wait a minute, we're not really recording to our laws.
We're not supposed to be sitting with these people.
But Jesus is Jesus.
Okay.
And he received criticism for what he did.
And sometimes we let that fear of awkwardness hold us back from deepening our relationships with others.
When we talk about moving from relationship that requires, from acquaintance to relationship, it requires intentional engagement.
Number three.
So let's talk a little bit about nuts and bolts.
I'm passionate about what we're talking about, about being a good neighbor.
This is important because it's the only way that I know and the only way that I've seen that works in truly growing a healthy church.
Once we've moved from stranger to acquaintance to relationship,
Then we have to start building the framework that helps sustain and deepen those relationships.
Because they don't grow by accident, they require intentionality, consistency, and commitment to investing in other people over time.
Again, we looked at our passage earlier, Proverbs 27-17, as iron sharpens iron, so one friend sharpens another.
We've got to build consistency and community.
Consistency is key to what we do.
Relationships require regular maintenance.
I used this illustration a long time ago in another context, but I think it applies here.
So you're not gonna be surprised with the little twist at the very end.
But if your spouse, when you were dating,
said, hey, I think we should get married.
But as soon as you say I do, don't expect me to be around much.
Don't expect me to be around.
I'm going to be at work.
I've got golf on Tuesdays.
I've got to be here.
I've got to be there.
I've got this, that, and the other thing.
And maybe once a week on Friday night, I'll pencil in.
Not pen, because something might come up.
I'll pencil in a couple of hours of date night.
Ladies, how many would jump all over that kind of a relationship?
I don't think many would.
Why?
Because it takes consistency.
When relationships fail, it's because there's consistency.
Something somewhere has broken down.
Somebody has allowed their heart, their mind, their whatever,
to be subsided or to be deviated one way or the other.
And so then the relationship breaks down because consistency isn't there.
When we talk about being able to be together, when we talk about being a good neighbor, it's about consistency.
Now, am I saying you have to invite them over every weekend and you have to have date night with your neighbor?
No, of course not.
That would be a little weird.
But checking in on them periodically,
What happened?
I started to use an illustration I used a long time ago, but it doesn't work anymore.
I started to ask you, what does it mean if a bunch of newspapers start piling up on their front porch?
The problem is nobody buys a newspaper anymore.
But what would that mean for those that know what newspapers are?
Some's going on at their house, wouldn't you agree?
Because if they've got the newspaper coming every day and they're starting to pile up, either they're gone or there might be some kind of health
something that they're not able to.
So what do we need to do?
We need to go.
Sally, you okay?
Just checking on you.
We're seeing that their cars been in the park in the driveway for several days and you know that they work a nine to five Monday through Friday.
So what does that require us to do?
It requires us to take the step out.
I know all of this may seem simple or trite when we talk about the grand picture of evangelism, but can I posit this to you?
This is the very basic foundation of any evangelism that has to happen.
This is the absolute bare minimum.
You have to begin to know who your neighbor is and how to interact with them.
Because again, it's great to go up and start talking to somebody
We used to play this game when I was in youth group and I would have the kids, students, sorry.
I would have them shout out just anything.
Okay.
Toaster.
And my job was to take the conversation from a toaster to evangelism.
Okay.
So the way that I taught this is we have to learn how to take the conversation from the realm of the physical to the realm of the spiritual.
And how do we do that?
We need to be intentional about the way that we are and the way that we act, the way that we talk.
And so how do we talk about a toaster being an act of evangelism?
Well, you know, that's a really nice toaster.
That's exciting.
Do you make a lot of toast?
Yes, I do.
That's great.
I'm going to be really cheesy here and make the big jump just for the sake of time.
But you know, I know this guy that says that if you
make bread with him or if you make toast with him, you'll never eat again.
Huh?
Yeah.
What do you mean?
You all know where I'm going with that.
I am the bread of life.
Okay.
And so now I can, I can flip it even if it's silly.
Now that one was a silly one.
Usually they're more subtle than that.
And we can kind of take it through this whole trip.
But this is the core of evangelism.
So for all of us,
It is an issue of being consistent, but we have to move from being a stranger to a neighbor one step at a time.
Again, evangelism explosion, where would you go if you were to die today?
That's okay, that's going from stranger to weirdo, okay?
Nobody likes a finger pointed in there, what do we call them now, cairns, okay?
Nobody likes that.
But if we'll follow the steps of being a good neighbor, of becoming a stranger, becoming an acquaintance, moving from an acquaintance to having some kind of relationship and then setting up the framework, moving forward, then we're able to follow the path.
So as we close, I know that today's was more rubber meets the road rather than big grandiose spiritual things.
But again, as I've said numerous times, we have an opportunity to express love, to love the Lord with all of our hearts, but then the other half of that, to love our neighbors, ourself.
We have an opportunity to express the love of Jesus, not just in giving away food and food ministry is wonderful, not in just giving out Bibles and it's great to give the Word of God.
We need to be giving the Word of God.
But something as simple as learning somebody's name and being available to them, even if there is not an immediate return on investment.
Doing this takes time.
It engages a little bit of awkwardness, but the rewards are far greater than the initial discomfort.
Can I tell you this?
And I appreciate more than you'll ever know that we were voted in for another three-year term.
But for that three years, we've been dropping seeds in the neighborhood.
just our neighbors, me and Letitia.
We're just now in the last six months beginning to see a little bit of opening up of those seeds.
We're just now really starting to see the fruit of that.
And should I have not been voted in and you bring in another pastor, there would have been a starting over.
because that's a new person, a new relationship, right?
A stranger then has to move to acquaintance, then has to move to relationship.
There are many of our neighbors, I say many, there's probably a handful, maybe half a dozen, that we have moved from stranger to acquaintance, and now we have about four that we're moving from acquaintance into relationship with.
Matter of fact, one of them came out, we, here on Halloween night, the neighborhood does a trick or treating thing,
the weekend before.
And so we sat out last Sunday night is when they did it.
So Latisha and I took our camp chairs.
We went and bought two bags of candy and we sat out in the front yard and we just gave out candy to anybody who would walk by.
And a couple of our neighbors who we have again planted seeds with all along came over and they're internationals.
They're from Pakistan.
And we began to have further conversations and move into and they finally felt comfortable to give us their phone number and we have contact information.
They live literally across the street.
And so now we're moving from relationship or I'm sorry, from acquaintance ship to a relationship.
But it takes time.
So if we want to see Berea Temple grow over the next one, two, three years of this term, we've got to begin to plant the seeds today.
And again, that's all of us moving from acquaintance, from stranger to acquaintance to relationship.
That's what I'm calling us to do.
So let's do this as we pray.
Every head bowed, every eye closed.
I wanna pray over us today.
that we would have boldness, boldness to speak, boldness to step out and to begin to plant the seeds that God has called us to.
It's not always about Jesus loves you and it's not always about some big grandiose act.
Sometimes it's as simple as, hey, my name is, it's great to meet you.
And the seed has been planted.
And so Father, I pray over each person within the sound of my voice.
Father, I pray that your spirit would give them boldness, that you would give us axe power to be your witnesses in Jerusalem, right here, right at home, at the embassy that you have established in our neighborhood.
Father, give us the power to speak
the power to step out, the boldness to share.
Father, I pray that you would help us to move from stranger to acquaintance and help us see those places that you've already established relationships.
Father, I pray over our neighbors.
You know each one.
There's so many represented within the church today.
But Father, I pray over each neighbor, those to the right, those to the left, those across the street and those behind.
Father, may your Holy Spirit go before us and begin to prepare the way.
Would you begin to prepare their hearts?
Would you begin to soften as you did in days past?
And may you give us boldness to step out and to speak to our neighbors.
Father, I pray that your Holy Spirit would do a work today.
It is in your name, I pray.
Amen, and amen.
Alters are open if should you need prayers during our closing song.
Of course, we'd always love to pray with you if you need anything
grade with or you can simply spend some time at the altar.